---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Two Ways To Live (Psalm 1)
category: Psalms
order: 1
permalink: /psalms/1
---

> <sup>1</sup> Blessed is the man <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor stands in the way of sinners, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor sits in the seat of scoffers; <br />
<sup>2</sup> but his delight is in the law of the LORD, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and on his law he meditates day and night. <br />	
<sup>3</sup> He is like a tree <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;planted by streams of water <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; yields its fruit in its season, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and its leaf does not wither. <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In all that he does, he prospers. <br />
<sup>4</sup> The wicked are not so, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but are like chaff that the wind drives away. <br />
<sup>5</sup> Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous; <br />
<sup>6</sup> for the LORD knows the way of the righteous, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but the way of the wicked will perish.

This Psalm is an introductory Psalm for the whole book of Psalms, and it talks about 2 types of people:

The one whose direction is away from the Lord, and in the first 2 verses they begin to walk and then they stand and then they sit, so they're walking in the way of the wicked, they are standing in the way of sinners, and they are sitting in the company of mockers. That's the negative way, but actually what the Psalmist says is the one who does not do that, who does not walk down that way is blessed. Not the way that they go, rather their delight is in the law of the Lord.

Usually in the book of Psalms, when it talks about the law of the Lord it means God's word. So this person delights in God's word. And they show their delight by meditating on his law day and night. Now in the Bible, meditation is different to perhaps what people talk about meditation today. It's not emptying your mind, it's filling your mind with God's word. So the person who is blessed by God fills their mind day and night with God's word.

And the result of doing that is this wonderful imagery in verse 3, it's like being a tree planted by streams of water. And that tree that has that permanent water supply will yield its fruit, will not wither, and whatever they do prospers. Now it is not a promise here for a material prosperity, but a spiritual prosperity. We know from the New Testament Paul says that in Christ we have been blessed with every spiritual blessing, if we are Christian believers. And the way we can experience this blessing is by this daily communion with the Lord through reading the Bible and praying.

Verses 4 and 5 though talk about the alternate for the person who does walk in the steps of the wicked or stand in the way of sinners or sit in the company of the mockers. They are not like a fruit-bearing tree by streams of water but they are like chaff that is not rooted and just blows away. And that's their experience in this life. But more importantly verse 5, they won't stand in the day of judgement, the day when we all stand before God, they will not stand. The reason that believers can be confident is verse 6, the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, and their way does not lead to destruction.

This Psalm is encouraging to keep meditating on God's word, to keep drinking it in and chewing it over. Maybe even trying to memorise small part of Scripture. But at least every day as we can digging deep into God's word.

Also it is important to note the first 4 words of this Psalm, "Blessed is the One". There is a sense in which this Psalm is for all of us, it's a call for all of us to meditate on God's word. But actually ultimately this Psalm is fulfilled in one person completely and entirely. It is the Lord Jesus.