---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Why Do You Hide Yourself? (Psalm 10)
category: Psalms
order: 10
permalink: /psalms/10
---

><sup>1</sup> Why, O LORD, do you stand far away?<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why do you hide yourself in times of trouble?<br />
<sup>2</sup> In arrogance the wicked hotly pursue the poor;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let them be caught in the schemes that they have devised.<br />
<sup>3</sup> For the wicked boasts of the desires of his soul,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the one greedy for gain curses and renounces the LORD.<br />
<sup>4</sup> In the pride of his face the wicked does not seek him;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;all his thoughts are, "There is no God."<br />
<sup>5</sup> His ways prosper at all times;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;your judgments are on high, out of his sight;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;as for all his foes, he puffs at them.<br />
<sup>6</sup> He says in his heart, "I shall not be moved;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;throughout all generations I shall not meet adversity."<br />
<sup>7</sup> His mouth is filled with cursing and deceit and oppression;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;under his tongue are mischief and iniquity.<br />
<sup>8</sup> He sits in ambush in the villages;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in hiding places he murders the innocent.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His eyes stealthily watch for the helpless;<br />
<sup>9</sup> he lurks in ambush like a lion in his thicket;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he lurks that he may seize the poor;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he seizes the poor when he draws him into his net.<br />
<sup>10</sup> The helpless are crushed, sink down,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and fall by his might.<br />
<sup>11</sup> He says in his heart, "God has forgotten,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he has hidden his face, he will never see it."<br /><br />
<sup>12</sup> Arise, O LORD; O God, lift up your hand;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;forget not the afflicted.<br />
<sup>13</sup> Why does the wicked renounce God<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and say in his heart, "You will not call to account"?<br />
<sup>14</sup> But you do see, for you note mischief and vexation,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that you may take it into your hands;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to you the helpless commits himself;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have been the helper of the fatherless.<br />
<sup>15</sup> Break the arm of the wicked and evildoer;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;call his wickedness to account till you find none.<br /><br />
<sup>16</sup> The LORD is king forever and ever;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the nations perish from his land.<br />
<sup>17</sup> O LORD, you hear the desire of the afflicted;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you will strengthen their heart; you will incline your ear<br />
<sup>18</sup> to do justice to the fatherless and the oppressed,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;so that man who is of the earth may strike terror no more.

This Psalm in many ways is a continuation of Psalm 9 particularly the second half of Psalm 9 and you can see that the Psalmist's complaint directed to God is there in verse 1:

> Why, O LORD, do you stand far away? Why do you hide yourself in times of trouble?

and that's a theme that goes throughout at the Psalms. That's why Psalms are so powerful and have been so powerful for Christians because they give us the words to express to God in times of trouble and they in a sense allow us to express our grief and our despair and our confusion.

Well, the particular problem that David is facing is the problem that has been going on through these Psalms. It is the problem of his enemies who oppose him and pursue him and in this Psalm he in a sense distills his enemies down to the essence of one person and we get the sense of this one person from verse 3 in which he boasts about or he worships even the cravings of his heart, he does not worship God:

> For the wicked boasts of the desires of his soul

and in verse 2 he hunts down the weak:

> In arrogance the wicked hotly pursue the poor

and in verse 4 he has no room for God:

> In the pride of his face the wicked does not seek him

Here is in a sense the essence of humanity apart from God.

Tim Keller in his really helpful book in the Psalms points out that this Psalm gives us so much detail to call us away from this path. There is a sense in which we are all tempeted to forget God and to go down this path and this Psalm calls us away from that. In that sense it is similar to Galatians 5. Galatians 5 describes the fruit of the Spirit but it also spends a few verses talking about the works of the flesh and Paul warns the Galatians not to go down this path, and that is what this Psalm does: It warns us not to go down this path of forgetting God because that way leads to violence against the weak, forgetting the weak. It also leads to worshipping the cravings of our heart, and perhaps we might not be tempeted to kind of pursue the weak but certainly we are all tempted to just worship what our heart's desire rather than worshipping God.

Well, David in this Psalm resolves this tension even though this violent man seems to be prospering. He resolves it by pointing in verse 11 to the fact of judgement. This man, he says to himself that God will never notice, he covers his face and never sees:

> He says in his heart, "God has forgotten, he has hidden his face, he will never see it."

So the reason this man acts the way that he does is that he does not think that he will be judged, but in verse 15 David calls on God to break the arm of the wicked man, call the evildoer to account for his wickedness that would not otherwise be found out:

> Break the arm of the wicked and evildoer; call his wickedness to account till you find none.

There will come a day of judgement when all of humanity will be called to account and that is a good reminder for us when we are tempted to just turn our backs on what God wants us to do and to just live the way that we want to worship the desire of our hearts. Remember there is a day of judgement and so David reflects on that, he also, as he has been doing throughout these Psalms, reflects on the character of God (verses 16-17):

> The LORD is king forever and ever; the nations perish from his land. O LORD, you hear the desire of the afflicted; you will strengthen their heart; you will incline your ear

David drew great comfort from that. We might not be being pursued by evildoers in the way that David is, but for us it is wonderfully encouraging to be reminded that the Lord hears the desire of the afflicted and the Lord is the one who encourages us and who listens to our cry. He is the one in verse 18 who defends the fatherless and the oppressed, the ones who cannot help themselves, so that mere earthly mortals will never again strike terror. In a world today most of us are not facing this kind of oppression from people. Some of us might be. We are facing a different type of oppression but we can take comfort from these words that he the Lord is the one who hears our desires, who listens to our cries, and who encourages us.
