---
layout: page
lang: en
title: The LORD Is Our Refuge (Psalm 11)
category: Psalms
order: 11
permalink: /psalms/11
---

>To the choirmaster. Of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> In the LORD I take refuge;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;how can you say to my soul,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flee like a bird to your mountain,<br />
<sup>2</sup> for behold, the wicked bend the bow;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;they have fitted their arrow to the string<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to shoot in the dark at the upright in heart;<br />
<sup>3</sup> if the foundations are destroyed,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;what can the righteous do?<br />
<sup>4</sup> The LORD is in his holy temple;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the LORD’s throne is in heaven;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;his eyes see, his eyelids test the children of man.<br />
<sup>5</sup> The LORD tests the righteous,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but his soul hates the wicked and the one who loves violence.<br />
<sup>6</sup> Let him rain coals on the wicked;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;fire and sulfur and a scorching wind shall be the portion of their cup.<br />
<sup>7</sup> For the LORD is righteous;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he loves righteous deeds;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the upright shall behold his face.

This Psalm starts with a real note of confidence or faith (verse 1):

> In the LORD I take refuge

That is something we have seen throughout these Psalms. David expressing his confidence in God. But this confidence that David expresses, this faith in God, is in the face of some negative advice that others are telling him. So he is being told in verse 1 and the rest of verse 2 to "flee like a bird to your mountain. Look the wicked are coming, they are ready to shoot their arrows at the upright, David you need to flee!". And the situation seems hopeless at verse 3 when the foundations are being destroyed. What can the righteous do? People are saying to David, "Just save yourself just get out of here, stop trying to do your duty as a king there is no point." He is being tempted to despair, to flee, to give it all up now.

Verse 3 really resonates to us because even though our experience is very different to David, the feeling many of us have would be encapsulated in verse 3: When the foundations are being destroyed, what can the righteous do? Well, this Psalm tells us that as believers in Jesus there are 4 things we can do, and the first thing is that we can keep trusting in the Lord. Again, in verse 1:

> In the LORD I take refuge

or in verse 4:

> The LORD is in his holy temple; the LORD’s throne is in heaven;

So even as the foundations are being destroyed, even as David is facing a crisis he reminds himself that God is in control, the LORD reigns even when the wicked bend their bow, even when the foundations are being destroyed. The LORD reigns. It is good to remember that. This is a chaotic time, everything is being upturned, but the LORD reigns.

The second thing as believeres we can do is to remember that this is a time of testing. It is a time of testing, you can see it in verse 5:

> The LORD tests the righteous

or so at the end of verse 4:

> his eyes see, his eyelids test the children of man.

He observes everyone on earth, his eyes examine them. The LORD examines the righteous or tests them and that idea of God testing or disciplining believers is throughout the Bible. You can think of Hebrews where he talks about God disciplining those that He loves. Paul reflects on how kind of suffering and testing produces character. Now we have to be careful here, the Bible is equally clear that God does not cause evil, he is not the author of evil. Nevertheless he is still sovereign over evil: It is not as if what is happening in the world has surprised him or outside his sovereignty. We have already seen that he is in his holy temple. He is on his heavenly throne. God is in control but he is able to use the evil in the world for our good and there is a sense in which even though it is very difficult we can pray, "Lord, please, would you use this to develop my character?"

The third thing is we can remember at God's judgment and we get that at the end of verse 5:

> but his soul hates the wicked and the one who loves violence. Let him rain coals on the wicked; fire and sulfur and a scorching wind shall be the portion of their cup.

There is a day of judgement and it reminds us as believers to take this opportunity to share our faith and encourage our friends to turn to Christ because there is a day of judgement coming, even though the world is in crisis, even though we might be feeling that our foundations are being overturned, we have got to recognise and live for that future day when everything really will be upturned and the world will come to an end and only those who are in Christ will be saved, and so as Christian believers we want to take this opportunity even though we might be struggling and finding it difficult to share the gospel with others, but we also need to remember ourselves of God's judgement. And so if we are tempted to say it is all too difficult, I just cannot believe in God anymore, one of the things that we can remind ourselves is know that there is a judgement coming and we do not want to face that judgement outside of Christ so we want to keep trusting in him.

The final thing we can remember is hope and that is the last note of the Psalm:

> For the LORD is righteous; he loves righteous deeds; the upright shall behold his face.

That is the great hope for us as Christians that on the last day we will see the Lord Jesus, will be reunited with him, we will see his face.