---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Lies and Arrogance Will Not Prevail (Psalm 12)
category: Psalms
order: 12
permalink: /psalms/12
---

>To the choirmaster: according to The Sheminith. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> Save, O LORD, for the godly one is gone;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for the faithful have vanished from among the children of man.<br />
<sup>2</sup> Everyone utters lies to his neighbor;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;with flattering lips and a double heart they speak.<br />
<sup>3</sup> May the LORD cut off all flattering lips,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the tongue that makes great boasts,<br />
<sup>4</sup> those who say, “With our tongue we will prevail,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;our lips are with us; who is master over us?”<br />
<sup>5</sup> “Because the poor are plundered, because the needy groan,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will now arise,” says the LORD;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I will place him in the safety for which he longs.”<br />
<sup>6</sup> The words of the LORD are pure words,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;like silver refined in a furnace on the ground,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;purified seven times.<br />
<sup>7</sup> You, O LORD, will keep them;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you will guard us from this generation forever.<br />
<sup>8</sup> On every side the wicked prowl,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;as vileness is exalted among the children of man.

Words are powerful, even lies, and at the time of a global crisis (like the COVID era) we crave for information, we want to know what is going to happen, when is the crisis going to end, and so on. But it is also a time when lies spread: There are a number of scams going around, or where people are trying to exploit our craving for information.

The Bible is very realistic in its view of humanity and it is very clear that all too often we lie to one another to our own advantage, and that is David's experience and he begins praying to the Lord, "Help, Lord!", and the reason he needs help is because no one is faithful, no one is loyal, everyone lies. The thing about a lie is that it allows you to control reality, and right from the beginning Satan the father of lies tried to control the reality that God had put in place by telling Eve, "You know God did not really say" and that is what a lie does, it tries to control reality but it also tries to exploit, and we get it there in verse 5:

> Because the poor are plundered, because the needy groan

and it is particularly those who are poor and needy who are exploited by people's lies and so David prays to the Lord to silence those who lie (verse 3):

> May the LORD cut off all flattering lips, the tongue that makes great boasts

and he prays that God would silence those who think, in verse 4:

> “With our tongue we will prevail, our lips are with us;

and then right at the end of verse 4 is the key:

> who is master over us?"

and that is again the essence of using a lie, using your words to try and control reality, to control the world and to be your own Lord.

The answer, though, that God gives in verse 5, is that he will arise and he will defend the needy, and then, as David reflects in contrast to the lies of human beings, in verse 6:

> The words of the LORD are pure words, like silver refined in a furnace on the ground, purified seven times.

That is a reminder for us in these days of uncertainty that we can go to God's Word, which is flawless and we can have the certainty for eternal life. The Word of God might not tell us exactly what is going to happen tomorrow but it enables us to continue to trust in the Lord and to continue faithfully waiting on him

This verse also points us to the ultimate revelation of God in the Lord Jesus Christ the Word of God, so even though David here is talking about kind of Scripture, it does remind us that even as we read the written word that prompts us to put our faith in Jesus at the word of God just as we saw in Psalm 1 and 2: Blessed is the one who meditates on the law, blessed is the one who takes refuge in his son. And so this Psalm for us is a reminder to continue to listen to God's Word and to continue to imitate the practice of the Lord Jesus by telling the truth in a world when, verse 8, what is vile is honored by the human race even though we are conscious of our sin, as we seek to follow the Lord Jesus we will prize truth.
