---
layout: page
lang: en
title: How Long O LORD? (Psalm 13)
category: Psalms
order: 13
permalink: /psalms/13
---

>To the choirmaster. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> How long, O LORD? Will you forget me forever?<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How long will you hide your face from me?<br />
<sup>2</sup> How long must I take counsel in my soul<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and have sorrow in my heart all the day?<br />
<sup>3</sup> Consider and answer me, O LORD my God;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;light up my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death,<br />
<sup>4</sup> lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed over him,”<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lest my foes rejoice because I am shaken.<br />
<sup>5</sup> But I have trusted in your steadfast love;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my heart shall rejoice in your salvation.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I will place him in the safety for which he longs.”<br />
<sup>6</sup> I will sing to the LORD,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;because he has dealt bountifully with me.<br />

This is a Psalm that picks up very many of the themes we have been seeing in the last few Psalms. It is a Psalm that moves from despair to hope and we might have noticed 4 times David asks the Lord how long and it seems to him that God has forgotten him, that he has, in verse 1, hidden his face from him, and we might have remember from the end of chapter 11 that David's great hope is to see God's face and so he is feeling abandoned by God and he is also feeling sorrow inwardly. He is wrestling his thought (verse 2), day after day he has sorrow in his heart.

And the particular thing he seems to be struggling with is the fact that his enemy is triumphing over him like many of the Psalms that we have been looking at. We know that our experience is not exactly the same as David but the expression of despair we can all resonate with, maybe that questioning how long Lord, how long is this going to go on, it is so difficult. Maybe we wrestle with our thought, day after day we have sorrow in our heart, and so it is helpful to see how David comes to a sort of resolution of his struggling with these things.

In verse 3, his prayer to God is

> Consider and answer me, O LORD my God; light up my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death

Some commentators think that perhaps what David is facing is some kind of illness, so that prayer is a prayer for healing but even as he is wrestling with sickness it is in the context of enemies surrounding him and we have seen in the Psalms, fleeing from Absalom, being surrounding by enemies who try to give him false advice and so his prayer is that the enemy would not triumph.

But this Psalm is really very similar to all the Psalms that we have seen so far. In fact, almost all of David's Psalms have this kind of double edge. There is kind of sorrow and struggle but there is also confidence of God or again as one commentator has put it, there is the presence of the enemy and the presence of God, and as such that really encapsulates the life of the Lord Jesus. In his life Jesus was very, very aware of the presence of God even as he surrounded by enemies and as we are in Christ it really encapsulates our life. We have the joy of knowing God's presence but we are also surrounded by the enemy, the evil one.

But like David, like Jesus, we have confidence in God's unfailing love (verse 5), and we can rejoice in his salvation. David is so confident in God's love and salvation that in verse 6 he says

> I will sing to the LORD, because he has dealt bountifully with me.

I will sing the Lord's praises not because he will do good for me but because he has done good for me, and it is as if David is looking from the vantage point of "I have prayed this to God, I am so confident that he will do good to me that I can say in the past tense that he has done good to me".

This is a Psalm that encapsulates a lot of the themes we have been seeing in the Psalms and so it is a Psalm for these days, a Psalm where we are given the words to say, when we wrestle with our thoughts, when day to day we might have sorrow in our hearts. It is an encouragement that like David, like the Lord Jesus, to not focus on the enemy whether it is a disease or the temptations we might find in our hearts but to trust in God's unfailing love and to rejoice in his salvation.
