---
layout: page
lang: en
title: God Is With The Generation of The Righteous (Psalm 14)
category: Psalms
order: 14
permalink: /psalms/14
---

>To the choirmaster. Of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> The fool says in his heart, “There is no God.”<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They are corrupt, they do abominable deeds;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;there is none who does good.<br />
<sup>2</sup> The LORD looks down from heaven on the children of man,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to see if there are any who understand,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who seek after God.<br />
<sup>3</sup> They have all turned aside; together they have become corrupt;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;there is none who does good,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;not even one.
<sup>4</sup> Have they no knowledge, all the evildoers<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who eat up my people as they eat bread<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and do not call upon the LORD?<br />
<sup>5</sup> There they are in great terror,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for God is with the generation of the righteous.<br />
<sup>6</sup> You would shame the plans of the poor,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but the LORD is his refuge.<br />
<sup>7</sup> Oh, that salvation for Israel would come out of Zion!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When the LORD restores the fortunes of his people,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad.

With this Psalm of David we have a very penetrating analysis of the human heart, and it is the human heart that turns away from God and that the psalmist says is the essence of falling. The fool says in his heart there is no God (verse 1). To be an atheist is to be a fool. And turning away from God leads to a corrupt life. They are corrupt, their deeds are vile, there is no one who does good. It is very easy for us if we are Christian believers to look at this and say, "That is so crazy, so stupid". What we know, and what the apostle Paul in the book of Romans makes clear, is that this is true of every human being apart from God's grace. So if we as Christians, we are only Christians because God has opened our eyes. It is not through anything that we have done, and we know that, left to ourselves, this tendency is in all of us.

But the fool who sort of shakes their fist at God, or doesn't even bother to do that because they say that there is no God, what the rest of the Psalm goes on to show is how that stance towards God leads to life that is, as verse 3 says, corrupt: they have turned away, they have all become corrupt, there is no one who does good, not even one. Good is defined in what pleases God. If the essence of sins is not loving God with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your strength, then the person who says there is no God cannot do that.

The Psalm then moves from that kind of analysis of the sinful state of humanity to the realisation that this is going to be brought to judgement (verse 4):

> Have they no knowledge, all the evildoers who eat up my people as they eat bread and do not call upon the LORD?

But in verse 5 they are overwhelmed with dread, and the Psalmist here focuses on the day of judgement and the fact that God is present in the company of the righteous:

> There they are in great terror, for God is with the generation of the righteous.

The righteous who are exploited or downtrodden by these evildoers. What they have not taken account of is the fact that God is present in them and their refuge is in the Lord, and verse 7 points forward to that great day when salvation for Israel, for God's people, would come ouf of Zion when the Lord restores his people. Let Jacob rejoice and Israel be glad. It is really interesting those two themes that are intertwined in this Psalm, this rejection of God, this exploitation of God's people. And again we see that throughout the Psalms we see it throughout the Bible: the enemy of God will be the enemy of God's people.

This is a reminder that God will not allow his people to struggle forever. If our refuge is in him there will come day when, like Jacob, we will rejoice, we will be glad. But God has set a day of judgement when everything will be put right, whether that is the aggression of those who do not believe in God and there are Christians all over the world who feel that aggression acutely and the encouragement of this Psalm is that there will be a day when God will put everything right. For those of us in countries where it is relatively easy to be a Christian, even though we have that freedom we will struggle in a fallen world and this reminds us that there is a day of final salvation, there is a day when we will rejoice and we will be glad and we can confidently live for that day.
