---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Who Shall Dwell on Your Holy Hill? (Psalm 15)
category: Psalms
order: 15
permalink: /psalms/15
---

>A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> O LORD, who shall sojourn in your tent?<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who shall dwell on your holy hill?<br />
<sup>2</sup> He who walks blamelessly and does what is right<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and speaks truth in his heart;<br />
<sup>3</sup> who does not slander with his tongue<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and does no evil to his neighbor,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor takes up a reproach against his friend;<br />
<sup>4</sup> in whose eyes a vile person is despised,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but who honors those who fear the LORD;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who swears to his own hurt and does not change;<br />
<sup>5</sup> who does not put out his money at interest<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and does not take a bribe against the innocent.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He who does these things shall never be moved.

The question that this Psalmist (David) asks is who can enter God's temple? Who can enter the tent of the Lord? That is the sort of question that in the ancient world would have been fairly common, and we would have had other religious groups around the ancient Near East and they would have answered that question with a series of rituals. If you want to enter the temple of this particular god you need to do these particular rituals.

This Psalm gives a very different answer and it says if you want to come into God's temple, it is not a series of rituals that you need to do, it is a character that you need to have. It is a godliness or a holiness of life. And Derek Kidner in his very helpful commentary summarises the kind of attributes or that characteristics that David talks about here.

Firstly, he says in verse 2, that the person who can enter God's tent, his character is true. It is the one whose way of life is blameless, what he does is righteous, and he speaks truth from the heart. Sometimes we can read that word blameless and we throw up our hands and say, "Well, that is not me". We are definitely not blameless but again if we check the commentaries we will see that the underlying word there for blameless is more talking of a wholeness of heart. It is talking about an honesty of life. In other words, yes, we may sin, but we ask for forgiveness. It is not talking about moral perfectionism. And certainly David, as we read through the Psalms, we will see was far from perfect.

But it is talking about the direction of their life. The direction of their life is the way God wants them to live. So their character is true and their words are restrained towards their friend and foe alike. So the end of verse 2 talks about speaking truth from the heart and then verse 3, whose tongue utters no slander, who does no wrong to a neighbour, who casts no slur on others, so their words are restrained. So think of Proverbs 10:12: love covers all offenses. When someone says to you something that you do not like, the temptation is to respond in kind and inflame the situation. But the person whom God esteems, who draws near to him, is the person who controls their words and who does not speak unkindly of others.

In verse 4, this person's allegiance is clear-cut. Their allegiance is to the Lord. The language of despising a vile person is the language that we saw in verse 1: They do not go down the vile person's way but rather they honour the Lord. They go down at the Lord's way and then the Psalmist talks about how their dealings are honourable, and we have a very challenging idea at the end of verse 4: who keeps an oath even when it hurts and does not change their mind. The implication is that if they promise to do something they do not back out of it just because it does not suit them. They will follow through on their dealings. Their dealings are honourable.

And finally in verse 5, their place is secure: Whoever does this thing will never be shaken. In terms of their standing before God they will never be shaken. When we read a Psalm like this particularly those of us with tender consciences, we read this and we think this is not me. So often we don't tell the truth and we have to repent of it or really is our life blameless. We have to be careful on how we view this Psalm. This Psalm is a snapshot, it is not everything that the Bible says. Psalm 5:7 talks about who can enter God's temple and it is only by His great love that we can enter God's temple, so that gives us another perspective on it. But this Psalm like other parts of the Bible, e.g. Gal 5 which talks about the fruit of the Spirit, they do talk about the righteous life. This is the character and life that God wants from his people.

Where we do not live up to this, the Bible talks about a need to confess our sins and to confess our failings. So we do not read this and say, "It is all or nothing, unless I live up to this absolutely perfectly there is no hope for me", but nor do we say, "Well, because I cannot live up to this, this is irrelevant to me". No, this is what we want to live as Christian people. This is the characteristic that we want to display. When we fall, yes, we confess our sins, we repent, we ask God to renew us to repentance so that we can live for him. So these verses are challenging and they are searching and we do need to examine our lives and make sure that we are not indulging ourselves in another way and sort of saying, "Well, it does not matter how I live". Yes we are forgiven because of Jesus' blood where we are right before God because of Jesus' righteousness but this is the life that we are called to and the description here is very much in line with the life of discipleship that Jesus lays out in the New Testament.
