---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Kiss The Son (Psalm 2)
category: Psalms
order: 2
permalink: /psalms/2
---

> <sup>1</sup> Why do the nations rage<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the peoples plot in vain?<br />
<sup>2</sup> The kings of the earth set themselves<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the rulers take counsel together<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;against the LORD and against his Anointed, saying<br />
<sup>3</sup> “Let us burst their bonds apart<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and cast away their cords from us.”<br />
<br />	
<sup>4</sup> He who sits in the heavens laughs;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the Lord holds them in derision.<br />
<sup>5</sup> Then he will speak to them in his wrath,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and terrify them in his fury, saying,<br />
<sup>6</sup> “As for me, I have set my King<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on Zion, my holy hill.”<br />
<br />
<sup>7</sup> I will tell of the decree:<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The LORD said to me, “You are my Son;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;today I have begotten you.<br />
<sup>8</sup> Ask of me, and I will make the nations your heritage,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the ends of the earth your possession.<br />
<sup>9</sup> You shall break them with a rod of iron<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”<br />
<br />
<sup>10</sup> Now therefore, O kings, be wise;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;be warned, O rulers of the earth.<br />
<sup>11</sup> Serve the LORD with fear,<br /> 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and rejoice with trembling.<br />
<sup>12</sup> Kiss the Son,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lest he be angry, and you perish in the way,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for his wrath is quickly kindled.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Blessed are all who take refuge in him.

In Psalm 1 we saw the Psalmist describe evil people in the way that they walk, stand, and sit. Here the expression of evil is rebellion against God and it is expressed in the form of the kings of the earth who rise up against God.

The coronavirus is called the coronavirus because the shape of the protein has a little crown on it. Effectively, the coronavirus is one of a king. It is trying to run our lives and in one sense it is very similar to any fake king. Any king who put themselves up against the true king, the Lord Almighty. God's response in Psalms to these fake kings is to laugh. God is the God who made the universe. Any pretend kind has nothing on him.

Not only does he laugh and scoff, verse 5: he rebukes these fake kings in his anger, he terrifies them in his wrath. And the way he terrifies them is by telling them, verse 6, that he has installed his king on Zion's holy hill. And then he goes on to describe how he installed his king, and it is not just any king, it is his son (verse 7):
> You are my Son; today I have begotten you

And God will give this king the nations as his inheritance and his possession. God's king will rule the nations.

This is a real encouragement for us, we know that it is fulfilled in the Lord Jesus, we know that Jesus is the true king. No matter what other fake kings might be out there, whether they are human or viral, Jesus is the true king. And the response that this Psalm calls for all of us to make, including for Christians, is there right at the end -- verse 12: Kiss the Son, pay homage to the Son, or he will be angry, and your way will lead you destruction, for his wrath can flare up in a moment.

And then there is this wonderful promise right at the end of this Psalm: Blessed are all who take refuge in him, in God's son, in God's true king. Obviously for Christians that is taking refunge in the Lord Jesus.

But it is interesting when you think about it, that Psalm 1 began with
> Blessed are those who meditate on God's word

That is the way to blessing according to Psalm 1, whereas Psalm 2 says the way to blessing is taking refuge in God's son. So are those just 2 ways of being blessed? Can you either pick one, either meditate on God's word or take refuge in God's son? I think they are connected. Psalm 1 and Psalm 2 are actually introductory Psalms for the whole book of Psalms. Reading these two Psalms together we see the way to take refuge in God's son. The way to take refuge in God's son is to meditate on God's word. In other words, if you meditate on God's word, including the Psalms, that will lead you to take refuge in God's son.
