---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Salvation Belongs To The LORD (Psalm 3)
category: Psalms
order: 3
permalink: /psalms/3
---
> A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son.<br/>
<sup>1</sup> O LORD, how many are my foes!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many are rising against me;<br />
<sup>2</sup> many are saying of my soul,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"There is no salvation for him in God."&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<br />
<sup>3</sup> But you, O LORD, are a shield about me,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my glory, and the lifter of my head.<br />
<sup>4</sup> I cried aloud to the LORD, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and he answered me from his holy hill.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<br />
<sup>5</sup> I lay down and slept;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I woke again, for the LORD sustained me.<br />
<sup>6</sup> I will not be afraid of many thousands of people<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who have set themselves against me all around.<br/>
<br />
<sup>7</sup> Arise, O LORD!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Save me, O my God!<br/>
For you strike all my enemies on the cheek;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you break the teeth of the wicked.<br/>
<sup>8</sup> Salvation belongs to the LORD;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;your blessing be on your people!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i>

## Context

This Psalm is a Psalm of David, and it has a historical marker, i.e. it was when he fled from Absalom his son. There are 14 Psalms in the book of Psalms that connect the Psalm to David's life. This particular one is when he's established as a king but his son Absalom rebelled against him. This is a Psalm that expresses the grief of betrayal and the agony of being opposed.

## Pressure and Distress

From the first 2 verses, it seems that it is not only Absalom but many are saying that there is no salvation.

> <sup>1</sup> O LORD, how many are my foes!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many are rising against me;<br />
<sup>2</sup> many are saying of my soul,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"There is no salvation for him in God."

David is under great pressure and distress. But then, jumping to verses 5-6, it is almost like the pressure and distress are gone.

> <sup>5</sup> I lay down and slept;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I woke again, for the LORD sustained me.<br />
<sup>6</sup> I will not be afraid of many thousands of people<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who have set themselves against me all around.

What is the reason? Obviously what comes in between (verses 3-4):

> <sup>3</sup> But you, O LORD, are a shield about me,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my glory, and the lifter of my head.<br />
<sup>4</sup> I cried aloud to the LORD, <br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and he answered me from his holy hill.

Here David does two things. Firstly, he reflects on the character of God (verse 3) and he cries to God (verse 4).

## The Psalm and Us

Something that would be great for us to carry out upon reading this Psalm is to continue to do to reflect on God's character. Obviously we have got the wonderfully fuller picture of God's character revealed in Jesus. God has come close to us in the Lord Jesus. Jesus has laid down his life for us, showing his great love for us. He defeated our enemies of sin and death and Satan by dying and rising again.

Like David we can also cry out to God, we can pray to him when things get difficult and desperate like they were for David. We have the wonderful privilege of being able to cry out to God in prayer, and then God promises that he will grant us peace in our hearts to sustain us through difficult times. At the end of the Psalm, David reflects that the victory is God's. Even in the last note in verse 8, "Salvation belongs to the LORD". It's not David whose won the victory, and as Christians, it is not us who triumph. It is the Lord Jesus who triumphs for us.

## Connection with Other Psalms

There are couple of really interesting connections in Psalms that we can see in its first three chapters. Where did the Lord answer David? "He answered me from his holy hill" (verse 4), where he says that his king was put (Psalm 2).

Finally there is a note at the end of verse 8, the promise that "your blessing will be on your people". That is the thing that we saw on Psalms 1 and 2: God is the one who blesses his people.
