---
layout: page
lang: en
title: Inward Peace in Distress (Psalm 4)
category: Psalms
order: 4
permalink: /psalms/4
---

> To the choirmaster: with stringed instruments. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You have given me relief when I was in distress.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Be gracious to me and hear my prayer!<br />
<br />
<sup>2</sup> O men, how long shall my honor be turned into shame?<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How long will you love vain words and seek after lies?&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<sup>3</sup> But know that the LORD has set apart the godly for himself;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the LORD hears when I call to him.<br />
<br />
<sup>4</sup> Be angry, and do not sin;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ponder in your own hearts on your beds, and be silent.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<sup>5</sup> Offer right sacrifices,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and put your trust in the LORD.<br />
<br />
<sup>6</sup> There are many who say, “Who will show us some good?<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lift up the light of your face upon us, O LORD!”<br />
<sup>7</sup> You have put more joy in my heart<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;than they have when their grain and wine abound.<br />
<br />
<sup>8</sup> In peace I will both lie down and sleep;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for you alone, O LORD, make me dwell in safety.

## The struggle
This Psalm is kind of a wrapped-up version of Psalm 3. The Psalmist (David) is really struggling with humiliation:
> O men, how long shall my honor be turned into shame?

lies:
> How long will you love vain words and seek after lies?

exasperation:
> "be angry and do not sin as you lie on your bed"

and despair:
> There are many who say, “Who will show us some good?"

Who can show us any good in the time of crisis? But like in Psalm 3, David turns himself to prayer:
> Answer me when I call

and he reminds himself of a character of God:
> O God of my righteousness and a God who is gracious

## Remembering what God has done in the past

But what is new to this Psalm is that he remembers what God has done in the past
> You have given me relief when I was in distress

That might be a good thing for us to do when things are very difficult, we can remember all those times when God answered prayers in the past, all those times when he helped us through the kindness of a friend or through a situation changing. As we pray to God we pray earnestly we can remember how he helped us in the past.

## The prayer

But the emphasis in this Psalm is certainly on prayer, it's there in verse 1:
> Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness!

> Be gracious to me and hear my prayer!

it's there in verse 3:
> the LORD hears when I call to him

it's even there in verse 5:
> put your trust in the LORD

And the content of the prayer is expressed in verse 6, again in the context of despair:
> There are many who say, “Who will show us some good?

Look at the wonderful content of the prayer that he gives in the second half of verse 6:
> Lift up the light of your face upon us, O LORD!

What a wonderful prayer!

In difficult times or during a crisis it's hard to know what to pray for, but actually the Bible is full of pre-packaged prayers that God has already given to us. So you might find it helpful at this time just to pray The Lord's Prayer, the prayer that Jesus taught us to pray. Another thing that you might want to do is take the beginning of Paul's letters. Most of the beginnings of Paul's letters you'll find prayers that Paul prays, you can echo those prayers. But here's a great prayer to just pray at different moments in the day:
> "Lift up the light of your face upon us, O LORD!"

You could pray that for anyone, for the health workers who have been doing so much for us, for the government, for your pastor if you're a Christian person, and so on.


## The outcome
And then at the end of the Psalm we have a wonderful outcome of verse 7:
> You have put more joy in my heart than they have when their grain and wine abound.

Even those who enjoy those kind of external prosperity, lots of grain and lots of new wine, they don't have much of joy as the Christian who has the joy of God in their heart. What a wonderful promise we have here. This promise is repeated throughout the Bible, think of the Lord Jesus (John 16:24):

> Ask and you will receive that your joy may be full

It is a wondefful promise that we can hold on to as Christians and then finally verse 8:

> In peace I will both lie down and sleep

You might have noticed that in verse 4 he was unable to sleep, the temptation to be angry on his bed and pondering about what these people are doing, and for many of us the night time might be a tricky time struggling to sleep. God gives peace so that we both lie down and sleep. The idea is that you lie down and you sleep immediately and again underneath it all is the character of God, the God who alone makes us dwell in safety.

That's a wonderful Psalm. It's a Psalm where David expresses real struggle and real disparity, who can show us some good but who is confident in God that the God to whom be praise may lift up the light of his face upon us.
