---
layout: page
lang: en
title: We Are Not Alone (Psalm 5)
category: Psalms
order: 5
permalink: /psalms/5
---

> To the choirmaster: for the flutes. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> Give ear to my words, O LORD;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;consider my groaning.<br />
<sup>2</sup> Give attention to the sound of my cry,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my King and my God,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for to you do I pray.<br />
<sup>3</sup> O LORD, in the morning you hear my voice;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in the morning I prepare a sacrifice for you and watch.<br />
<br />
<sup>4</sup> For you are not a God who delights in wickedness;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;evil may not dwell with you.<br />
<sup>5</sup> The boastful shall not stand before your eyes;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you hate all evildoers.<br />
<sup>6</sup> You destroy those who speak lies;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and deceitful man.<br />
<br />
<sup>7</sup> But I, through the abundance of your steadfast love,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;will enter your house.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will bow down toward your holy temple<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in the fear of you.<br />
<sup>8</sup> Lead me, O LORD, in your righteousness<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;because of my enemies;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;make your way straight before me.<br />
<br />
<sup>9</sup> For there is no truth in their mouth;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their inmost self is destruction;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their throat is an open grave;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;they flatter with their tongue.<br />
<sup>10</sup> Make them bear their guilt, O God;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let them fall by their own counsels;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;because of the abundance of their transgressions cast them out,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for they have rebelled against you.<br />
<br />
<sup>11</sup> But let all who take refuge in you rejoice;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let them ever sing for joy,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and spread your protection over them,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that those who love your name may exult in you.<br />
<sup>12</sup> For you bless the righteous, O LORD;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you cover him with favor as with a shield.
	

## Increasing Despair
Something we have been seeing in the last few Psalms (3, 4 and 5) is that David's despair has been increasing. Tim Keller in his book of the Psalms, a really helpful book titled "My Rock, My Refuge", calls this Psalm "an uncensored prayer of David". We get that from the language of verse 1 (groaning), and verse 2 (crying) you can really get the sense of David's despair. Maybe that is something that can resonate with us. We continue to look around the world, every day the news is bleaker and bleaker. And so maybe our experiences mirrorring that of David.

## Inclination to Payer
But it is interesting that David, even in the midst of his increasing despair, his desire or his motivation or his inclination is always to turn to God in prayer. We sort of get that increase in clarity in verse 1: he groans, and in verse 2: he cries, and then it is focused on in verse 2: he prays. And his prayer is personal. He prays to "my King and my God". It is very much a personal prayer.

And also in verse 3, we will notice that whereas the previous Psalm 4 is sort of an evening Psalm that talks about him on his bed, this Psalm is a morning Psalm:
> O LORD, in the morning you hear my voice;

## Sacrifice
And if we remember in the previous Psalms, the thing that kind of sustained David was the character of God (God is generous) and the past act of God (how God has answered him previously). But this Psalm adds something else and that is sacrifice (verse 3):
> O LORD, in the morning you hear my voice; in the morning I prepare a sacrifice for you and watch.

It seems to be that David has made a sacrifice and it is this sacrifice that he expects will cause God to hear him and that is a kind of biblical theme that runs throughout the Bible that God's people make sacrifices and it is on the basis of that sacrifice that we draw near and obviously this points us and reminds us of the greater sacrifice that we can rely on, the sacrifice that Jesus made of himself, not that we made a sacrifice, Jesus made a greater once-and-for-all sacrifice to bring us to God. And so as much as David was confident that God would hear him because of the sacrifice he made, we can be so much more confident that God would hear us because of the sacrifice of his Son, and so we can draw near to him.

## Appeal
The sort of main body of the Psalm is David kind of pleading to God to defeat his enemies. We get a general description in verses 4-6: David reminds that God doesn't delight in wickedness and that he destroys those who speak lies. And then if we go down to verses 9-10, he sort of puts his enemies in that category: they are liars, their throat is an open grave, and more than that they actually have rebelled against God. So David is sort of saying, "God, these are the people that you said that you are opposed to, look at them!". But in between, in verses 7-8, David appeals to God's steadfast love. He also appeals to the fact that he fears God and he cries out to God to lead him, and we get that wonderful cry of faith:
> make your way straight before me.

## We Are Not Alone
Then at the end of the Psalm David reflects on the fact that he is not alone. Notice what he says:
> let all who take refuge in you rejoice; let them ever sing for joy

David reflects on the fact that he is not the only one who takes refuge in God, there are others, and then we get that wonderful refrain right at the end
> bless the righteous, O LORD; you cover him with favor as with a shield

So this is a wonderfully encouraging Psalm as they all are, and this is very helpful for us, it reminds us that as we cry out to God we can remember Jesus' sacrifice, so much greater than the sacrifice that David was able to appeal to. We can remember God's steadfast love that he has shown to us in Jesus. And we can remember that however difficult things are, we are not alone: God is with us and we have other Christian brothers and sisters around the world who are experiencing the same things, who we can encourage and who we can pray for and who can pray for us.
