---
layout: page
lang: en
title: A Psalm of Waiting (Psalm 6)
category: Psalms
order: 6
permalink: /psalms/6
---

> To the choirmaster: with stringed instruments; according to The Sheminith. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> O LORD, rebuke me not in your anger,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor discipline me in your wrath.<br />
<sup>2</sup> Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am languishing;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;heal me, O LORD, for my bones are troubled.<br />
<sup>3</sup> My soul also is greatly troubled.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But you, O LORD—how long?<br />
<br />
<sup>4</sup> Turn, O LORD, deliver my life;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;save me for the sake of your steadfast love.<br />
<sup>5</sup> For in death there is no remembrance of you;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in Sheol who will give you praise?<br />
<br />
<sup>6</sup> I am weary with my moaning;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;every night I flood my bed with tears;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I drench my couch with my weeping.<br />
<sup>7</sup> My eye wastes away because of grief;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it grows weak because of all my foes.<br />
<br />
<sup>8</sup> Depart from me, all you workers of evil,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for the LORD has heard the sound of my weeping.<br />
<sup>9</sup> The LORD has heard my plea;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the LORD accepts my prayer.<br />
<sup>10</sup> All my enemies shall be ashamed and greatly troubled;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;they shall turn back and be put to shame in a moment.

## Prayer in Despair

This Psalm is a Psalm of waiting, we get that in verse 3:
>My soul also is greatly troubled. But you, O LORD—how long?

But it's also a Psalm of deep despair:
> I am weary with my moaning;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;every night I flood my bed with tears;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I drench my couch with my weeping.

Derek Kidner in his commentary says, "this Psalm gives words to those who scarcely have the heart to pray and brings them within sight of victory". It's a wonderfully relevant Psalm for us. Here is a Psalm that helps us, that is God's word to us in the midst of despair. First, while it seems that David's approach of God is that he is conscious of his sins and we see that in the way that he asks God not to respond to him in wrath and anger, David is like someone with a very tender conscience. He is very aware of what he has done, but nevertheless even with his tender conscience he turns to God (verse 4):
> Turn, O LORD, deliver my life; save me for the sake of your steadfast love.

## God's Unfailing Love

He said save me, not because of the things I have done, good or bad, but save me because of your unfailing love. God's unfailing love is not something that we initiate, it is not something that we do that initiates a response in God. Tim Keller has said, "God's unfailing love is not because we are perfect. It doesn't respond to our perfection&mdash;we don't have that&mdash;but it comes from God's perfection, it is God's perfect love."

In verse 5, David reflects on the fact that he is facing death and even as he faces that he cries out to God and says no one praises you from the grave, and then verse 6, we get this kind of low point, this real sense of desperation: I am worn out from my groaning, I have drenched my bed with my tears. And here is a sense of real desperation but wonderfully here is a Psalm that we can pray even as we might feel similarly desperate to David.

Well, verses 8 to 10 finished with this wonderful note of confidence. Our confidence that God has heard his weeping, heard his cry for mercy and accepts his prayer, particularly in these Psalms that we have been seeing kind of 3, 4, 5, 6. The context of David's suffering is it seems his fleeing from Absalom, the desperation of being in exile and his particular kind of opponent are the enemies who are pursuing him and so he's confident in verse 8:
> Depart from me, all you workers of evil, for the LORD has heard the sound of my weeping.

God even hears our weeping, that's even before he gets to his prayer. God hears, he hears all weeping. That is wonderfully encouraging, isn't it? Verse 9:
> The LORD has heard my plea; the LORD accepts my prayer.

and so verse 10:
> All my enemies shall be ashamed and greatly troubled; they shall turn back and be put to shame in a moment.

## The Suffering of the Lord Jesus and Us

A wonderful Psalm that give us words as we wait. Many of us have that feeling of waiting. Some of us will have that feeling of desperation and this Psalm gives us words. This Psalm reminds us of God's steadfast love and it calls us to have a confident faith in that God of steadfast love. But it also points to the Lord Jesus, who, like David, experienced all these things, opposition from enemies. Jesus in the garden is overwhelmed with tears. The difference is that Jesus was suffering for us, our suffering King went through that suffering for us to reconcile us to God but it also means that he understands. The Lord Jesus knows what it is to suffer. The Lord Jesus knows what it is to almost get to the point of desperation. So as Christians again we are in an even better position that David in our reason to be able to pray to God and be confident that out of his steadfast love he will hear us and sustain us and enable us to persevere.
