---
layout: page
lang: en
title: I Take Refuge in You (Psalm 7)
category: Psalms
order: 7
permalink: /psalms/7
---

> A Shiggaion of David, which he sang to the LORD concerning the words of Cush, a Benjaminite.<br />
<sup>1</sup> O LORD my God, in you do I take refuge;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;save me from all my pursuers and deliver me,<br />
<sup>2</sup> lest like a lion they tear my soul apart,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rending it in pieces, with none to deliver.<br />
<br />
<sup>3</sup> O LORD my God, if I have done this,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if there is wrong in my hands,<br />
<sup>4</sup> if I have repaid my friend with evil<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;or plundered my enemy without cause,<br />
<sup>5</sup> let the enemy pursue my soul and overtake it,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and let him trample my life to the ground<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and lay my glory in the dust.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<br />
<sup>6</sup> Arise, O LORD, in your anger;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lift yourself up against the fury of my enemies;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;awake for me; you have appointed a judgment.<br />
<sup>7</sup> Let the assembly of the peoples be gathered about you;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;over it return on high.<br />
<br />	
<sup>8</sup> The LORD judges the peoples;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and according to the integrity that is in me.<br />
<sup>9</sup> Oh, let the evil of the wicked come to an end,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and may you establish the righteous—<br />
you who test the minds and hearts,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O righteous God!<br />
<sup>10</sup> My shield is with God,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who saves the upright in heart.<br />
<sup>11</sup> God is a righteous judge,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and a God who feels indignation every day.<br />
<br />	
<sup>12</sup> If a man does not repent, God will whet his sword;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he has bent and readied his bow;<br />
<sup>13</sup> he has prepared for him his deadly weapons,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;making his arrows fiery shafts.<br />
<sup>14</sup> Behold, the wicked man conceives evil<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and is pregnant with mischief<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and gives birth to lies.<br />
<sup>15</sup> He makes a pit, digging it out,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and falls into the hole that he has made.<br />
<sup>16</sup> His mischief returns upon his own head,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and on his own skull his violence descends.<br />
<br />
<sup>17</sup> I will give to the LORD the thanks due to his righteousness,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and I will sing praise to the name of the LORD, the Most High.

## The Context of this Psalm
Psalm 7 is the last Psalm in a sequence from Psalm 3 through to Psalm 7 which seemed to really be recounting the experience that were all written by David, seemingly in the period of his exile caused by Absalom his son rebelling against him. About the little historical note at the beginning of Psalm 7 concerning Cush a Benjaminite: there's no reference in the rest of the Bible to Cush but we know from 2 Samuel 16 and 20 during this period of Absalom's rebellion that the tribe of Benjamin were particularly opposed to David, so again this seems to be written from this period. This Psalm at the end of the sequence, in a sense gives the widest perspective on the opposition that David has faced. It is an opposition that takes the form of violence against him and at slander.

## Taking Refuge in God
And, in this Psalm, David reflects again on the character of God, that God is the one who defeats his enemies and by implication defeats all of the enemies of God's people and so it reflects on God's justice and God's salvation. And as we have seen throughout these Psalms, as David has gone through this very difficult period, his trust remains steadfast on God. It is there in verse 1:
> O LORD my God, in you do I take refuge;

And if you read the commentaries you will see that it is not that David is saying "I will take refuge in you", but "I take refuge in you; This is what I do, I take refuge in you whatever is happening around me. My faith in you remains the same."

## The One Who Knows Our Heart
One thing that David does in this Psalm is that he protests his innocence, so verse 8:
> <sup>8</sup> The LORD judges the peoples;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and according to the integrity that is in me.<br />

And he appeals again to the character of God, end of verse 9:
> you who test the minds and hearts,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O righteous God!<br />

He reflects on the fact that God is the one who knows. He knows the end from the beginning, he knows what is in our hearts, and so now as we can read this and we can think, "Well, this is not for me because if I am honest, you know, we all know that we are sinners". Can we say that in ourselves we are righteous? But David is not so much talking about, you know, it is not as if he is perfect. He is reflecting on a situation in a very similar way to how Job reflects on his situation. Job's friends say, "The reason that you're suffering is you must have done something particularly wrong, something particularly evil. That is why you are suffering". And Job protests his innocence. It is not as if Job is saying "I am sinless". It's saying "No, I have not done anything that bring these kind of problems on me", and at the end of Job, Job is proved to be right. That is what David is doing here. We know that David was not perfect. We just read the kind of Bathsheba which happened before this. David did not say that he is perfect. But in his role as a king he has not been, he has not done the things that they are accusing him of. He is not the kind of corrupt king who has aboused the people under him. When he did it with Bathsheba and Uriah he repented and he was forgiven.

## Taking Refuge in God When Being Falsely Accused
So this is a helpful Psalm, it is a Psalm that helps us if we are falsely accused of something. That is oen of the most desperately difficult things when someone falsely accuses us of things. Maybe we won't experience it with the intenstiy of David but particularly with the pressure that everyone is on, you know, relationships are strained and this is the sort of thing that might happen to us. And it is a reminder like David we take refuge in God, we remember firsthand that he is our shield, he is the one who saves the upright in heart. Again, not the perfect, but those who keep short accounts with God, who confess their sins. That is what it means to be upright in heart, not morally perfect or flawless&mdash;none of us are that&mdash;but as those who confess their sins and keep short accounts with God. And it is a reminder that God will defeat evil and that is why David finishes the Psalm singing the praises to the name of the Lord most high who will defeat evil forever.

## A Psalm that Points to The Future
This Psalm also then points us forward to the time when there will be no more evil, there will be no more opposition of God's people. There will be no more death, there will be no more sickness and it is a wonderful reminder as right throughout the Bible we are being pointed forward to the wonderful vision at the end of the Bible in Revelation 22 when all things will be put right.

## This Psalm and Jesus
The Psalm also points us to Jesus in a negative way. If you remember back to Psalm 2, the description of God's king on God's holy hill, you know, the nation is trembling. Well, the experience of David, God's king, has not been like that and it is a reminder that David did not fulfill the role of Psalm 2. And so we are waiting for someone, a king, a real Psalm 2 king, and that king is the Lord Jesus, who, in his death and resurrection, has defeated evil forever.
