---
layout: page
lang: en
title: How Majestic Is Your Name (Psalm 8)
category: Psalms
order: 8
permalink: /psalms/8
---

> To the choirmaster: according to The Gittith. A Psalm of David.<br/>
<sup>1</sup> O LORD, our Lord,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;how majestic is your name in all the earth!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You have set your glory above the heavens.<br />
<sup>2</sup> Out of the mouth of babies and infants,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have established strength because of your foes,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to still the enemy and the avenger.<br />
<br />	
<sup>3</sup> When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the moon and the stars, which you have set in place,<br />
<sup>4</sup> what is man that you are mindful of him,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the son of man that you care for him?<br />
<br />
<sup>5</sup> Yet you have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and crowned him with glory and honor.<br />
<sup>6</sup> You have given him dominion over the works of your hands;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have put all things under his feet,<br />
<sup>7</sup> all sheep and oxen,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and also the beasts of the field,<br />
<sup>8</sup> the birds of the heavens, and the fish of the sea,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;whatever passes along the paths of the seas.<br />
<br />
<sup>9</sup> O LORD, our Lord,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;how majestic is your name in all the earth!

## Two Themes of This Psalm
There are two themes in this Psalm, the first of which is of God's glory, and we see that in verse 1 and verse 9:
> how majestic is your name in all the earth!

That is the kind of the frame of the Psalm. But also we see the value of human beings (verse 4):
> what is man that you are mindful of him,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the son of man that you care for him?

So God's glory and the value of human beings. And those 2 themes&mdash;it is not as if they are just 2 random themes&mdash;are actually connected. As human beings created in the image of God, our dignity rests on the fact that we give glory to God. And in the Psalm we see that human beings give glory and praise to God in our weakness and our frailty. And we see that in the reference to infants in verse 2:
>Out of the mouth of babies and infants,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have established strength because of your foes,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to still the enemy and the avenger.

## Every Human Being Is Valuable
God reveals his glory in that even through the praise of children and infants&mdash;the kind of weakest part of humanity if you like&mdash;God silences his enemies. Jesus quotes this part of the Psalm as he enters Jerusalem in Matthew 21, and the children praise him and he sees this as the wonderful fulfiment of this Psalm. It is why we value and nurture even the weakest members of our society. As Christian people, we value every human being. Their worth is determined in their relationship to God and not in the value they might contribute to society. We know that every human being is valuable.

## Humanity Displays The Glory of God
Even in our weakness and frailty we give glory to God, but also in its strength humanity displays the glory of God and we see that in verses 3 and 4 when David says,
> When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers,

The universe is just the work of God's fingertips. You imagine what if he sort of metaphorically put his whole self into what he would create, the universe is just the creation of his fingertips.
>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the moon and the stars, which you have set in place,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;what is man that you are mindful of him,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the son of man that you care for him?<br />
<br />
Yet you have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and crowned him with glory and honor.<br />
You have given him dominion over the works of your hands;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have put all things under his feet,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;all sheep and oxen,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and also the beasts of the field,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the birds of the heavens, and the fish of the sea,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;whatever passes along the paths of the seas.<br />

## The Fractured Destiny of Humanity
Humanity rules over all of God's creation. Everything has been put under humanity's feet. Human life then is valuable because, in its loving dominion over the rest of creation, it displays the glory of God. So humanity in its kind of spectrum, from the weakest aspect of humanity (that infants, the children) to humanity in its kind of glorious aspect of lovingly ruling the world, displays God's glory. But maybe particularly at this time we do not really see human beings as strong. We do not seem to be able to control our universe. A tiny little virus can effectively control us as in the time of covid, so how do we understand this? This Psalm does not seem to actually line up.

## Jesus and The Future Reality
Well, it is very interesting if we see how this Psalm is interpreted in the New Testament, it is picked up in Hebrews 2 and in Hebrews 2 the author does two things: First of all, he sees it fulfilled in Jesus. He admits that actually at this time we do not see this really being realised. We do not see human beings ruling the world but we do see it fulfilled in Jesus who has conquered death and who is at God's right hand and who is ruling everything.

And the Psalm also sees that this is fulfilled in the world to come. So Hebrews 2:5 says that it is the world to come that this applies. And so this sounds really helpful as we reflect in the tension in our world we see the glory of humanity but we see the shame of humanity as well: we know we are sinful. We also see the fact that we do not rule effectively. We abused our rule or we are controlled by the elements. Those tensions are resolved in Jesus. He is the perfect human being who this Psalm speaks to without any kind of qualification. Jesus is the one who rules. Jesus is the one who reflects God's glory perfectly. And as much as we are in Jesus we will experience that in the world to come. We can look forward to a time when this Psalm will be true, even of us in Jesus fully, and we will fully reflect God's glory.

## Conclusion
So this is a wonderful Psalm for us, particularly in our current time. It reminds us how we are to review our fellow human beings. They are valuable because they give glory to God. They are made in his image. And it gives us hope as we look forward to the time when this Psalm will be wonderfully true on every level as it is already true in Jesus. In the new creation, in the new heaven and the new earth, it will be true in an absolute sense.