---
layout: page
lang: en
title: I Will Recount Your Wonderful Deeds (Psalm 9)
category: Psalms
order: 9
permalink: /psalms/9
---

> To the choirmaster: according to Muth-labben. A Psalm of David.<br />
<sup>1</sup> I will give thanks to the LORD with my whole heart;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will recount all of your wonderful deeds.<br />
<sup>2</sup> I will be glad and exult in you;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will sing praise to your name, O Most High.<br />
<br />
<sup>3</sup> When my enemies turn back,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;they stumble and perish before your presence.<br />
<sup>4</sup> For you have maintained my just cause;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have sat on the throne, giving righteous judgment.<br />
<br />
<sup>5</sup> You have rebuked the nations; you have made the wicked perish;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;you have blotted out their name forever and ever.<br />
<sup>6</sup> The enemy came to an end in everlasting ruins;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their cities you rooted out;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the very memory of them has perished.<br />
<br />	
<sup>7</sup> But the LORD sits enthroned forever;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he has established his throne for justice,<br />
<sup>8</sup> and he judges the world with righteousness;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he judges the peoples with uprightness.<br />
<br />
<sup>9</sup> The LORD is a stronghold for the oppressed,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a stronghold in times of trouble.<br />
<sup>10</sup> And those who know your name put their trust in you,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for you, O LORD, have not forsaken those who seek you.<br />
<br />
<sup>11</sup> Sing praises to the LORD, who sits enthroned in Zion!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; among the peoples his deeds!<br />
<sup>12</sup> For he who avenges blood is mindful of them;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he does not forget the cry of the afflicted.<br />
<br />
<sup>13</sup> Be gracious to me, O LORD!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;See my affliction from those who hate me,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O you who lift me up from the gates of death,<br />
<sup>14</sup> that I may recount all your praises,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that in the gates of the daughter of Zion<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I may rejoice in your salvation.<br />
<br />
<sup>15</sup> The nations have sunk in the pit that they made;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in the net that they hid, their own foot has been caught.<br />
<sup>16</sup> The LORD has made himself known; he has executed judgment;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the wicked are snared in the work of their own hands.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Higgaion</i>.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i><br />
<br />	
<sup>17</sup> The wicked shall return to Sheol,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;all the nations that forget God.<br />
<br />
<sup>18</sup> For the needy shall not always be forgotten,<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the hope of the poor shall not perish forever.<br />
<br />
<sup>19</sup> Arise, O LORD! Let not man prevail;<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let the nations be judged before you!<br />
<sup>20</sup> Put them in fear, O LORD!<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let the nations know that they are but men!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Selah</i>

## A Psalm of Two Halves
We had a bit of a pause with Psalm 8 but here with Psalm 9 we are back in this pattern of David expressing his anxiety and his despair, certainly in the second half of the Psalm. But the first half of the Psalm is really a very confident note: David starts by expressing that he is giving thanks to God with all his heart. He also remembers all of God's wonderful deeds and says that he will tell them. And then in verses 3 to 12, he talks about how he is glad and rejoices and sings praise to God's name.

There are three very helpful things for us to be doing at any time, but particularly at a time where we are feeling increasingly discouraged:
<ol>
<li>In the midst of that we can do what David does: We can give thanks to God with all our heart. They have done studies that show that actually writing down things that we are thankful for does have a positive effect on our outlook. So that might be something that we can do. Ask the Lord to give us that thankful heart so that we can be thankful to him. Throughout the Scriptures, thankfulness is a key component of what it means to be a believer in God. The opposite of giving thanks is grumbling and complaining and we will know from particularly that the first few books of the Bible with Israel and their desert, how negative that was. So why not take some time today to write down&mdash;Writing down helps to encapsulate it and crystallise it&mdash;things that we are thankful for.</li>
<li>And then David remembers God's wonderful deeds and that is another thing that we can do. We can remember ways in which God has helped us in the past, the ways in which God has answered prayer and it would be good to just think about instances in our own life where we were at the point of desperation, things were very difficult and God answered prayer and then in particular be good to just reflect on God's character and to praise him.</li>
<li>It is very helpful here in verse 9 that the Lord here is&mdash;The Lord's character&mdash;a refuge for the oppressed. He is a stronghold in the time of trouble. A wonderful picture of God being that one that we can take refunge in. He is our stronghold even as we struggle.</li>
</ol>

This is a Psalm of two halves. The second half flips back to the experience of David in the midst of his trying circumstances, fleeing from his enemies. And so he says at one point, "Have mercy on me, lift me up from the gates of death". It is very helpful the fact that this first half of the Psalm David is rejoicing, he is giving thanks, he is expressing confidence in God, he is doing that even though the experience of his life is actually the second half of the Psalm. That is really a picture of the Christian life at any time: It is simultaneously giving thanks to God, rejoicing in him even while our external circumstances might be very difficult.

## Conclusion
This Psalm encourages us to do what David does in the first half of the Psalm: Even though circumstances are difficult we can give thanks to him, we can reflect on his character, we can remember the ways that he has answered prayer in the past. So that would be a good thing for us to do. Those three things even as we also cry to God for mercy and that is exactly what David does. It is fine to speak to God and say, "God, I am finding this very difficult. Please help me, please sustain me, and please bring an end to this crisis."

We do not want to just simply read ourselves into this Psalm, but David's experience is very similar to the experience of every believer and David's experience in many was is similar to the experience of the Lord Jesus as we were reflecting that his life was a life of thankfulness to God, rejoicing in God even as he suffered. So this is a Psalm that is wonderfully encouraging.
