---
layout: page
lang: en
title: The Pre-existent Jesus Christ (John 1:1-5)
category: John
order: 1
permalink: /john/1_1-5
---

> We need a president, in the White House, who will fight against unfair trade practices. We need a president who will fight for universal health care. We need a president who will end this war in Iraq. We don’t need more of the same. We need to change the direction of our economy and our nation. It is now my pleasure to introduce to you to someone you’ve seen, and someone you admire, and someone who you’re going to say, after just a week or a month in the White House, “what a breath of fresh air”.

That was an introduction given by a guy named Carl Levin in a place called Flint. And you know the man he was introducing: Barack Obama, who was then a presidential candidate, and who is now a former president of the United States of America. The introduction was a very standard introduction that Barack Obama received perhaps a thousand times during the election times. He was introduced like that over and over again. It was always a big hype. The more important the person being introduced, the less you need the introduction, but the longer the introduction would be.

Barack Obama holds such an important office in the world that in a way he needs no introduction, so wherever he goes, wherever he speaks, he will get a long introduction to remind you of all the important facets of his character, all the things that he stand for, all the things that he holds.

If you had to introduce Jesus, how would you introduce him? In a sense Jesus is the kind of important person who needs no introduction. That’s why it is not surprising that John gives him 17 verses of introduction before we even hear the name Jesus. And now we are going to look at the first 5 verses.

> <sup>1</sup> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. <sup>2</sup> He was in the beginning with God. <sup>3</sup> All things were made through him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. <sup>4</sup> In him was life, and the life was the light of men. <sup>5</sup> The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it. (John 1:1-5)

John’s Gospel works a little bit differently to the other Gospels. In the other Gospels, we are introduced to Jesus without much information about him. In a sense, in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, we discover more about Jesus every time we see another snapshot of his life or ministry. And our knowledge about Jesus snowballs. In John’s Gospel, we still get snapshots of his ministry when we grow in our knowledge of Jesus, but John wants to give us almost like the big picture of Jesus’ life before he starts the snapshots. That’s why we have this introduction. It’s as though that John wants us to understand the big picture about Jesus first, so then we are equipped to understand everything Jesus does in the snapshots in the light of the big picture.

As we come to be introduced to Jesus in John’s Gospel, we’re all coming from different places, from different levels of understanding of Jesus. Some of us might have never been introduced to Jesus before. Others of us might have been introduced to Jesus recently and have only recently started to know about Jesus. Others of us might have been introduced to Jesus a long time ago and have been growing as a follower of Jesus for a long time. Wherever you’re at, John’s Gospel is going to be really helpful for you.

In the 4<sup>th</sup> century A.D., a guy named Augustine who was a philosopher and a theologian, said this about John’s Gospel, “The Gospel of John is deep enough for an elephant to swim and shallow enough for a child not to drown.” Whether you’re a big elephant or just a youngster in coming to Jesus, the Gospel of John has lots that will challenge you about where you are at with Jesus. So let’s get into it.

As the Gospel of John opens, we are immediately forced to confront the reality that Jesus was something before he was a man. Have a look at verses 1 and 2. As John opens his Gospel, he takes us right back to the creation of the world. If you know anything about the Old Testament of the Bible, you probably know the way it begins.

> “In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.”

That is the first sentence of the Bible. It’s interesting because John has mirrored the first words of the Bible in his introduction to his Gospel here: “In the beginning.” They are those famous words straight out of Genesis 1. John has done that deliberately so that you and I would have creation in the backs of our mind as we come to understand who Jesus is, the pre-history of Jesus. So if you want to understand Jesus, you need to see him in the light of creation.

It’s a little bit tricky to speak about the pre-history of Jesus, about Jesus being something before he was Jesus, cause in a sense the name Jesus was only taken on by Jesus when he became a man. But if we’re saying that he was something before he became a man, well, what do you call that something? Well, John refers to this pre-existent Jesus as “the Word”. What is going on here?

When John wrote this Gospel, Greek philosophy was prevalent, and logos, the underlying Greek term for “word”, was a big concept. One of the problems, though, is that logos means different things in different schools of Greek philosophy. The Stoics, for example, used the term as the rational principle by which everything exists. But when John talked about logos, he doesn’t talk about principle, but a person. Another example would be Plato and his followers, who made a distinction between the ideal world (which they call the logos of God) and the copy of the ideal world (which according to them is the real world where we live in). So, Plato spoke about this ideal upon which our world had been patterned. However, it’s a very dualistic kind of idea there and the Bible doesn’t see dualism of the ideal and the copy. The Bible sees one creation under God. And still many more people at that time used the term differently, and this makes the concept very complicated and inconsistent. Therefore, it is very unlikely that John had this concept in his mind when writing this passage.

Given that John often refers to the Old Testament, the best option to understand why John uses this term would then be the Old Testament itself. The Old Testament shows that the word of God is connected to:
<ol>
<li>
God’s powerful activity in creation:
<blockquote>By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his mouth all their host (Psalm 33:6)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
God’s powerful activity in salvation:
<blockquote>He sent out his word and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction (Psalm 107:20)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
God’s powerful activity in revelation:
<blockquote>Now the word of the Lord came to me, saying, “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and before you were born I consecrated you; I appointed you a prophet to the nations.” (Jeremiah 1:4-5)</blockquote>
</li>
</ol>

This idea of word in the Old Testament takes on a personified nature. We could say that God’s word is his powerful, ultimate self-expression in creation, in salvation, and in revelation. However, if this Word was there in the beginning, then logically either the Word was God or the Word was with God. But John insists both (verses 1-2). That is a profound statement about the nature of God, isn’t it? John is not saying about two gods here, but he is stating two truths about God that are completely true. The pre-existent Jesus is God himself and yet is a unique person within the Godhead. This is hard to comprehend.

At this point, already John’s Gospel challenges other views that the world offers. Modalism, for example, says that God is a single person who first manifested himself in the mode of the Father, and at the incarnation in the mode of the Son, and after the ascension in the mode of the Holy Spirit. Another example would be polytheism, in which there is more than one god. This may include the Jehovah's Witnesses who think that this verse must be translated as “The Word was with God and the Word was a god”. Still another example would be the many views which say that Jesus is just a man but not God.

Well, yes, we are struggling to understand God, but really we shouldn’t be surprised that God is beyond our comprehension. And that is exactly why God came into flesh: to reveal himself. That is exactly why John wrote his Gospel.

So far we have seen that Jesus has existed even before the creation of the world. However, John also wants to show us that Jesus’ existence is the key to our existence (verse 3). Jesus was crucially involved in creation. In Genesis chapter 1, it is clear that God created through his word (notice the repeated phrase “and God said” there). What John 1:3 teaches us is that this word of God is the pre-existent Jesus, God’s agent in creation. The apostle Paul says something very similar:

> He (Jesus) is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. For by him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him. And he is before all things, and in him all things hold together. (Colossians 1:15-17)

That means everything owes its existence to that word, to Jesus. But it’s not just creation that came through Jesus, but also your very life (verse 4). Jesus is the source of your life. Life lives in Jesus. This verse is not saying that Jesus created life, but rather it’s saying that life is now in Jesus. Life is found in him. If you have life, you only have it because Jesus continues to give it to you. All life resides in him.

In the world of art, there are two different kinds of arts, namely still-life art and performance art. In a still-life art, the artist paints a picture and then she displays the picture. The artwork is thus independent of the artist. In a performance art, however, the artist plays a piano and she continues to play the piano. So a performance artist is the artwork. Now Jesus is to life what the performance artist is to performance art. Life is in Jesus. Life will continue tomorrow if Jesus ordains it to continue tomorrow (see Colossians 1:17 as we have seen above). So it shouldn’t be surprising that later in John’s Gospel Jesus is wandering around offering life to different people.

> Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. Whoever believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live…” (John 11:25)

> Jesus said to him, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. (John 14:6)

So Jesus is the word of life, and having said this John goes on in verse 4 to say that that life is the light of men. Now what does life have to do with light? In the Bible, light is usually an image for the revelation of God, and that is certainly the case here. So the source of life is also the source of light, and this means that the one in whom life exists is the one who reveals God and enlightens the world.

Now verse 5 is where darkness and light come into play. Darkness is a universal image for evil. It is the metaphor for the evil/sinfulness of humanity against God. The world, as depicted in John’s Gospel, is in spiritual darkness; it is darkened by the unbelief and rejection against God, and God’s answer to spiritual darkness is to send light.

> Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.” (John 8:12).

However, the coming of Jesus into the world as the light brought on a huge confrontation, because the darkness does not like the light. Unbelief does not like God turning up in the flesh. But again verse 5 reminds us that the darkness has not overcome the light. The great battle of the light versus the darkness at the cross proves that. Jesus died at the cross, and yet the darkness has not won. Jesus was not overcome by the darkness, but rather he gave his life as a sacrifice and his victory is reinforced by his resurrection. The light has not been overcome by the darkness.

All these events can be found in John’s Gospel, and John writes all these things for one purpose: so that you may believe in Jesus.

> these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name. (John 20:31)

John wants to encourage us to trust in Jesus, because life is found in him. Anyone who wants to put their trust in Jesus will have eternal life. So don’t underestimate Jesus.
