---
layout: page
lang: en
title: The Incarnation of The Word (John 1:6-18)
category: John
order: 2
permalink: /john/1_6-18
---

How do you like to think of God? Maybe you’ve blogged your own god already for the world to see. It’s not hard to create your own god by your imagination. Or maybe, for some of you, creating your own god is dissatisfying because you are looking for certainty of who God really is. In any case, God has actually revealed himself to us, so we don’t need to speculate anymore about him.

We saw in the first 5 verses of this Gospel that John the writer was introducing us to Jesus in a cosmic way, in cosmic proportions, that Jesus has always been with God for all eternity and he has been God for all eternity (more about this on the previous post). Now, from verse 6 onwards, we are going to see that he becomes one of us, takes on flesh. What John really wants to show us is that in the person of Jesus, we have God becoming one of us, God turning up within his creation.

> <sup>6</sup> There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. <sup>7</sup> He came as a witness, to bear witness about the light, that all might believe through him. <sup>8</sup> He was not the light, but came to bear witness about the light.
<br />
<br />
<sup>9</sup> The true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world. <sup>10</sup> He was in the world, and the world was made through him, yet the world did not know him. <sup>11</sup> He came to his own, and his own people did not receive him. <sup>12</sup> But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, <sup>13</sup> who were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God.
<br />
<br />
<sup>14</sup> And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth. <sup>15</sup> (John bore witness about him, and cried out, “This was he of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me ranks before me, because he was before me.’”) <sup>16</sup> And from his fullness we have all received, grace upon grace. <sup>17</sup> For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. <sup>18</sup> No one has ever seen God; the only God, who is at the Father’s side, he has made him known.

It’s interesting that the first man named in John’s Gospel is not Jesus, but John the Baptist (verses 6-8). John the Baptist is introduced in all four Gospels as the forerunner to Jesus, and only in John’s Gospel he is never referred to as John the Baptist, but simply John. The writer of this Gospel is usually very careful not to confuse two people with the same name (e.g. Judas and Judas Iscariot in 14:22 and 13:26). But why is here a bit different? Well, because the only other John in the Gospel, who is John the writer of the Gospel (hence John’s Gospel), never speaks about himself by name in the Gospel, but rather as the disciple whom Jesus loved. So whenever the name John appears in this Gospel there should be no ambiguity since it always refers to John the Baptist.

So John the Baptist is pushing in here, even before we’ve really met Jesus in the Gospel. Why this anti-climax? This Gospel started out in eternity, where the Word, Jesus, was always God and was always with God, and we’re waiting for the Word to touch down as flesh. But somewhere in between we’ve got John the Baptist. Why this anti-climax? The answer is because John the Baptist has a very important role to make sure that Jesus is clearly identified. John the Baptist is testifying that Jesus is the light, the revelation of God that the world has been waiting for (and verse 8 emphasizes that John the Baptist is not the light itself).

Testifying (or bearing witness) is a big theme in John’s Gospel. Here are some brief snapshots ahead:
<ol>
<li>
The first witness is, as we have seen, John the Baptist:
<blockquote>If I alone bear witness about myself, my testimony is not deemed true. There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the testimony that he bears about me is true. You sent to John, and he has borne witness to the truth. (John 5:31-33)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
Secondly, the word or the miracles that Jesus does:
<blockquote>But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John. For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me. (John 5:36)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
Thirdly, God the Father himself:
<blockquote>And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me (John 5:37)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
And then the Scripture:
<blockquote>You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness about me, yet you refuse to come to me that you may have life. (John 5:39-40)</blockquote>
</li>
<li>
Also many more: The Samaritan woman (John 4) who witnessed the truth about Jesus to her entire village, and the crowd (John 11) who were watching Jesus raising Lazarus from the dead, and also the disciples, who are appointed to be witnesses to Jesus both in Jerusalem and throughout the world.
</li>
</ol>

So John the Baptist’s role is to clearly identify Jesus so that people don’t miss him. Clear identification is really important so that people would believe in him and not make mistake by rejecting him. And yet John the Baptist did his job, and look what happened: Even though Jesus was clearly identified, he was clearly rejected (verses 9-11). Jesus the true revelation of God was coming into the world that he had made, his creation, so that they would no longer have to speculate about God, and yet the world did not know him.

The phrase “the world did not know him” (verse 10) sounds very innocent, or perhaps sounds more like a recognition problem. But there’s more to it though in John’s Gospel. It is not a mere recognition problem, but rather a rebellion problem. In John’s Gospel, the world is not innocent, but an image for sinful humanity; the world is humanity united against God, and so the world did not know Jesus (verse 10). The world has turned its back on God. But that’s not even the worst of it. Verse 11 tells us that Jesus came to his own world, his own people, and yet they did not receive him, they rejected him. Jesus himself was born as a Jew, as one of God’s chosen people, and yet they rejected him. This rejection theme starts in chapter 1 and it grows and grows throughout the book, and it ultimately culminates in the cross. But in a way, their rejection is our salvation. Because in God’s great plan the rejection of Jesus went all the way to the cross, and that is why we have the opportunity to receive him.

To receive Jesus is to believe in his name, to believe that he is the Christ, the Son of God, and to accept that he is God’s chosen savior, and to accept him personally as our individual savior and to all who do receive Jesus like this, he gives the right to become a child of God, part of the family (verse 12). This right to become children of God is a privilege that we tend to underestimate. Because our world tends to think that everyone is a child of God. Our world thinks that if you breathe or live, then “the Mother Nature” has created you, and as such you are already a child of god. But John here is saying no, not everyone is a child of God. In fact, John is saying that you only get the privilege if you receive Jesus as your Lord and savior. Can we see how amazingly personal salvation is? Salvation is not just God taking you off a ban list, and adding you to the-allowed list. Salvation is God bringing you into the family, declaring you one of his children, and such adoption must not be taken for granted.

Now if the question “what if God was one of us” intrigues you, then the question “what if God made me one of his” should blow you away. In a later letter that John wrote, he put the privilege like this:
> See what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of God; and so we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it did not know him. Beloved, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is. (1 John 3:1-2)

Then in verse 13 John goes on to say that becoming a child of God is not a natural process: There was no natural blood relationship tying us to God, there was no desire of parents to bring forth the child. Here John’s saying that coming into God’s family is supernatural. It will only happen because God became one of us to bring us into the family.

Now the Word of God, Jesus, who has been with God and who was God, took on flesh (verse 14). This is a very offensive statement to the first century Jews. The flesh is just gritty and grainy, and yucky and bloody: John is saying that Jesus came and put on kneecaps, and a spleen, and elbows, and the little wobbly thing that hangs around the back of the throat. And by putting on all those things, Jesus became like us to dwell amongst us (verse 14). That word “dwell” in the original Greek language means to pitch a tent. It’s a word that would remind any of the first century Jews of the great tabernacle in which God had dwelt in the past in the midst of his people, way back in Israelite history, in the exodus, from slavery in Egypt, when God dwelt among his people in a tent.

> There I will meet with the people of Israel, and it shall be sanctified by my glory. I will consecrate the tent of meeting and the altar. Aaron also and his sons I will consecrate to serve me as priests. I will dwell among the people of Israel and will be their God. And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt that I might dwell among them. I am the LORD their God. (Exodus 29:43-46)

Can you see God’s desire to be amongst his people? But as John introduces us to Jesus the Word who became flesh, we see that in Jesus God is amongst his people in a more personal way than ever before. And even in such personality, Jesus is still fully God. He lost none of God’s glory when he put on the flesh (verse 14). All the glory of God, full of grace and truth, resided in Jesus (verse 14). Again this verse takes us back to the exodus:

> Moses said, “Please show me your glory.” And he said, “I will make all my goodness pass before you and will proclaim before you my name ‘The LORD.’ And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. (Exodus 33:18-19)

> The LORD descended in the cloud and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD. The LORD passed before him and proclaimed, “The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children’s children, to the third and the fourth generation.” (Exodus 34:5-7)

God’s glory is his character of perfect love and perfect justice. Both sides of God’s perfect character show his glory, that God is slow to anger and abounding in love and yet judging the wicked for generations. When God wants to display his glory he proclaims his perfect character. Just as Moses witnessed that on Mount Sinai, John the disciple (the writer of the Gospel) here also witnesses in the person of Jesus. And in case you could possibly miss it, we’ve got John the Baptist in verse 15 appearing again saying, “this Jesus is the one”.

And in Jesus we have all the fullness of God, and from that fullness comes the opportunity for us to experience God’s grace (verse 16). Now grace means undeserved kindness, and that is exactly what Jesus is offering. Did you notice in verse 16 though that it says from Jesus we have received grace upon grace? What does that mean? Well, that word “upon” in its original Greek form can mean a number of things. Firstly, it can mean “in return for”. But that does not make sense considering that grace means undeserved kindness. Secondly, it can mean “on top of”. So in that case it would be grace on top of grace, like wave after wave of God’s kindness that we didn’t deserve. That sounds possible, but again it’s not the best option. The most likely option would be that it means “in place of”. Verse 17 seems to support this argument: When God gave his law to his people through Moses at Mount Sinai (verse 17), God was actually showing grace to his people. The law, the covenant that God’s people could come into with God was all about grace. It was God’s graciousness that he would gather sinful people to himself as his people. But Jesus has come to replace that way of relating to God with a new way of grace that he offers through his death on the cross. The old way of living under the grace of God has been completely fulfilled by Jesus and replaced by new way of grace in Jesus Christ. Jesus’ arrival brings grace in place of grace.

This introduction of John’s Gospel finishes in verse 18 by reminding us that God is now knowable. There’s only one who has ever seen God. There’s only one who has ever being beside God and that is Jesus Christ (verse 18). He has lived with God and now he has come to the world, taken on flesh, becoming like one of us so that we can know God. He did that to make God knowable. That phrase in verse 18, “he has made him known”, in the original Greek language literally means that he has given a full account. So John is saying that, in Jesus turning up in the flesh, we’ve got the whole, complete story of God.

Now this verse in a sense tells us what we should expect as we read through the rest of John’s Gospel. As John presents about Jesus in the subsequent chapters, we can expect that we could get a complete truth about God. We can learn everything we need to know about God by coming to Jesus in this Gospel because Jesus, the only one who has seen God, has lived with us.

That means you and I no longer needs to speculate about God. We don’t need to guess what God is like. Jesus has come and has revealed the full picture. In fact, now that Jesus has come and has revealed the full account, it is absolutely offensive to God to keep speculating about him. God has come in flesh and has revealed himself to us. But then we keep saying, “I’d like to think of God as…” and we choose our own adventure. It’s just too rude. So stop speculating. Don’t make God in our own image. Let God be God and let us respond to him as he truly is.

As a brief summary, God has not just made himself visible but knowable (verse 18). Seeing and knowing are two different things. Jesus has come so that we can actually know God.  It’s a chance to have a personal relationship with God that Jesus is offering. There are then only two options for us: reject him (as in verses 10-11) or receive him (as in verse 12). What’s going to be for you?
