---
layout: page
lang: en
title: The Snowballed Expectation (John 1:19-34)
category: John
order: 3
permalink: /john/1_19-34
---

There are things we wish we had never done. This is not about little annoying things like regrettable fashion choices and stupid album purchases, but things like hurting people, things we would really like to change. A few years ago the American band Hoobastank put out a song about this very issue. The song was called “The Reason” and here are some of the lyrics:
>“I’m not a perfect person, there’s many things I wish I didn’t do.<br />
But I continue learning, I never meant to do those things to you…<br />
I’m sorry that I hurt you, it’s something I must live with everyday.<br />
In all the pain I put you through, I wish I could take it all away,<br />
and be the one who catches all your tears…”<br />

Each of us, too, certainly has done things that we wish we had never done, things we wish we can undo. But it’s not just the things in the past that we’d like to change, but also our very self, that we don’t keep repeating the same mistake, that we can face the future confidently knowing that we can be different. If that is the case, then the passage from John’s Gospel we are going to look at now has things to say that would really be helpful:

<blockquote>
<sup>19 </sup>And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are you?” <sup>20 </sup>He confessed, and did not deny, but confessed, “I am not the Christ.” <sup>21 </sup>And they asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No.” <sup>22 </sup>So they said to him, “Who are you? We need to give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” <sup>23 </sup>He said, “I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’ as the prophet Isaiah said.”<br /><br />
<sup>24 </sup>(Now they had been sent from the Pharisees.) <sup>25 </sup>They asked him, “Then why are you baptizing, if you are neither the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?” <sup>26 </sup>John answered them, “I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know, <sup>27 </sup>even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.” <sup>28 </sup>These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.</br><br />
<sup>29</sup>The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! <sup>30 </sup>This is he of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who ranks before me, because he was before me.’ <sup>31 </sup>I myself did not know him, but for this purpose I came baptizing with water, that he might be revealed to Israel.” <sup>32 </sup>And John bore witness: “I saw the Spirit descend from heaven like a dove, and it remained on him. <sup>33 </sup>I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ <sup>34 </sup>And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.” (John 1:19-34)</br>
</blockquote>

Over the two previous posts, we’ve been working through the introduction, the prologue to John’s Gospel. In that introduction, John showed us the big picture about Jesus (John 1:1-18). John showed us that Jesus’ origins went back much further than just the stable in Bethlehem. He showed us that Jesus was God and was with God through all eternity. We saw that Jesus was the one through whom God created us and created the world and gave us life, and how amazing that this powerful Creator should take on flesh and became one of us.

But for 2000 years before the incarnation of Jesus, God’s people had been waiting a long time. God had made promises to his people, promises about forgiving their past sins, and changing them so they can face the future that would be better. At times, they waited really well: they trusted God and they lived in obedience to God. But at other times they waited really badly. They gave up on God and they refused to live for God. At times, in those 2000 years of waiting, God’s people would wish they had never hurt each other, and rejected God. They would have longed for a better future.

So by the time we get to the first century, the 2000 years of waiting, regretting, and hoping have snowballed into a lot of expectations. That’s why when John the Baptist steps out of the desert and starts baptizing people to repent in the Jordan River next to Israel, everyone’s wondering if he is the guy through whom God is going to start keeping his promises. But John the writer of the Gospel is very clear that John the Baptist is not the one, and we need to see that first before we realize that Jesus is the one.

John is baptizing the people of Israel in the Jordan River and telling them to turn away from their sins and get ready for God’s salvation. Because many Jewish people were going out to be baptized, the Jewish authority back at the head office in Jerusalem started to get a little bit worried. So they send out a delegation of priests and Levites upcountry to work out what’s going on with this John-the-Baptist phenomenon (verse 19).

In John’s Gospel, the theme of witnessing is really strong, and John the Baptist is the witness number one (see John 5 verse 31 onwards, as also has been discussed in the previous post). In verse 19 this witness language coming up again. John is called to give testimony, and he does not show away from the task of bearing witness. Can you see how much John the Gospel writer sets up John the Baptist as a faithful witness? Verse 20 is so emphatic: “John confessed, he did not deny, he confessed.”

John the Baptist confessed, “I am not the Christ” (verse 20). That may sound more like a denial. Confessing seems to be a positive thing, and yet here John the Baptist’s confession is a negative statement. But his negative is the foil for the very positive confession he is going to make about the Lord Jesus, and that’s the heart of this passage we are looking now.

The Christ was a much-anticipated Old Testament figure. The word “Christ” itself comes from the Greek word for the Hebrews “Messiah”. So if we want to understand what to expect in the Christ, then we need to go back and have a look at the great King David, the king of Israel at around 1000 B.C. David was a very impressive king. He was empowered by God to rescue God’s people from their enemies and to bring them peace. In a sense, Israel was never better than when they were under the great King David. So all the expectations on another Christ King who would come and rescue them and give them peace were built on the pattern of King David. Look at one of the promises God made to David:

> When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. (2 Samuel 7:12-13)

The Christ was going to rule on David’s throne forever. This promise is saying that one of David’s descendants is the king forever, and that’s the promise that set the expectations of the Christ who was to come to save Israel from their enemies and give them peace and rule over them forever. So the Christ Messiah would be empowered by God by God’s Spirit. Isaiah the prophet made this clear in his prophecy about how the Messiah would come.

> “There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, and a branch from his roots shall bear fruit. And the Spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and the fear of the LORD.” (Isaiah 11:1-2)

This Jesse was David’s father. This promise is again saying that from the line of Jesse-David we’re going to have a Messiah come, and he’s going to be equipped by God’s Spirit for the task of rescuing God’s people. So we see why the Israelites were eagerly anticipating this guy to come and rescue them. They had been dominated for hundreds of years by the world superpowers that had lived all around them: The Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Greeks, and the Romans had all dominated over them, and they were sick of being ruled by outsiders. Israel wanted a Christ king who would come and rescue them from their enemies and give them peace. And John the Baptist faithfully steps up and says, “I am not the one, it’s not me” (verse 20).

So this puts the interrogation delegation forward: if John is not the Christ, then maybe he is one of the figures who is going to prepare for the coming of Christ. So then they asked, “Are you Elijah?” (verse 21). Elijah was another one of the Old Testament figures, a prophet. He had a fascinating life, and even more fascinating end to his life.

2 Kings 2 tells us Elijah was taken up into heaven without facing death. He was taken up, somehow miraculously, alive into heaven. The Old Testament people knew that Elijah hasn’t died. He was in heaven, and then they received the promise from God of Elijah returning.

> “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes.” Malachi 4:5

The people knew that the day of the LORD was the day of Messiah coming in salvation and they knew that Elijah had to come first before this great and awesome day. So we can see why the delegation asked John the Baptist if he’s the Elijah. And again John says no. We’ve got a bit of work to do here because in the other Gospels, John seems to be described as the Elijah figure. For example, in the Luke’s Gospel, when an angel announcing John’s birth:

> “And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God, and he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.” (Luke 1:16-17)

Certainly John is described as the Elijah figure, and Jesus himself says this:

> “For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come.” (Matthew 11:13-14)

So why is John the Baptist saying that he is not Elijah while the angel and Jesus seems to be describing him in the other gospels as an Elijah figure? The problem is that Elijah did not die and therefore, if Elijah was taken into heaven alive, has he come back? So John the Baptist is saying that, “No, I am not Elijah, being in heaven, for a while come back.” He did not deny that he is an Elijah-type figure, but rather he denied that he is the Elijah coming back.

Then the next thing they asked is if John the Baptist is the prophet (verse 21). They are not asking whether he is a prophet, but they are asking whether he is the prophet. They’re focusing on another long expected Old Testament figure. This expectation goes back to the book of Deuteronomy:

> I will raise up for them (i.e. the Israelites) a prophet like you (i.e. Moses) from among their brothers. And I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I command him. (Deuteronomy 18:18)

Moses was one of the great figures in the Old Testament, and here, in the book of Deuteronomy, God’s saying that he is going to raise up a prophet like him to speak to the people of Israel. The Jewish authority wants to know whether John the Baptist is that prophet.

Again, he denied, since his role is not to speak God’s word as the great prophet but to prepare the people for the coming of the great prophet who would speak God’s word about salvation.

Now these incorrect guesses tell us that the people of Israel had a lot of expectations to be fulfilled. They had waited for more than 2000 years for their expectation to be fulfilled. In fact, we can say that this delegation is remarkably pleasant considering that they had been waiting for that long time.

Have a look at what happened next. They asked about the Baptist’s identity and he finally identifies himself in an image that he has taken straight out from Isaiah the prophet (verses 22-23): John is the voice, crying in the wilderness, telling people to make a straight path through the desert.

Isaiah spoke about this prophecy in about 550 years before John took it up. He spoke to the people of Israel when they were taken away from their land into exile, miserably oppressed by the Babylonian. Back then most of them would have said “I wish we had never turned away from God.”  The 80-year exile was God’s punishment for their sins, and Isaiah spoke into that situation about making a smooth path through the desert that stood between Babylon and Jerusalem. Isaiah spoke about making a highway home so that the people of God in exile can be rescued and can go back to God’s land. So John described himself as the voice crying out in the desert saying, “Let’s make another highway, because there’s another rescuer coming.” He is not the rescuer, but the forerunner preparing the way for the rescuer. His role is to make sure people see that Jesus is the one.

Then in verse 29, John the Baptist introduces Jesus for the first time with an unusual introduction: as the Lamb of God. That is a sacrifice language. The prophet Isaiah prophesied using the same language at 600 years before Jesus:

> But he was wounded for our transgressions; he was crushed for our iniquities; upon him was the chastisement that brought us peace, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned—every one—to his own way; and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and like a sheep that before its shearers is silent, so he opened not his mouth. (Isaiah 53:5-7).

Isaiah 53 is speaking about God’s people as sheep who have gone astray, who’ve turned away from God and wandered off. That God’s people haven’t just innocently wandered away from the good shepherd. Isaiah 53 talks about transgressions (i.e. breaking God’s law) and iniquity (i.e. wicked behaviour). Isaiah 53 is speaking clearly about the sins of God’s people, but the amazing thing about Isaiah 53 is that it promises that the sheep who commit all the sins are not the ones who will be punished. All we like sheep have gone astray, but it’s just one sheep who was crushed for our iniquities. Isaiah 53 promises that one sacrificial lamb would step in and take the punishment for the sins of the rest of God’s people and John the Baptist wants us to see that the sacrificial lamb is Jesus.

This idea of Jesus as the sacrificial lamb is saying that he is our substitute who steps in and takes the punishment in our place, and that is right of the heart of Christianity. Jesus is our substitute. He steps in and takes our punishment in our place. In John 10, Jesus says that he will lay down his life as a substitute for his sheep. This concept is called substitutionary atonement. To make atonement is to pay the appropriate penalty for sin so that the sinners and God can be restored to a right relationship (hence “at-one-ment”) and the way that Jesus does that atoning is by substituting himself to take the punishment that sinners deserve. Jesus is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world and he does it by nailing our sins upon himself and paying the full punishment of death on the cross. It’s not just Jesus facing the punishment for sins with us: It’s Jesus facing the punishment for sins instead of us. That is great news for each of us who has ever looked back at our sins and said, “I wish I had never done that.” Jesus can take the sins away because he died on the cross instead of us.

Now John’s job was to identify Jesus. In a sense what John was doing is like what they do when there’s a new car being unveiled. John’s kind of taking the sheath off and showing that here he is. John is unveiling God in the flesh, the great God who has become one of us in order to be our sacrificial Lamb. John’s purpose is to reveal Jesus to Israel so they don’t miss him, but do you notice that he keeps reminding us about who’s most important (see verses 30-31)? There’s no debate in John’s mind about who came first. In the first century Israel, if you’re older than me then you’re more important than me, and vice versa. We know from the Bible that John the Baptist was six months older than Jesus, but he keeps telling us that Jesus’ pre-existence means that he is pre-eminent.

Look back at the verses 26-27 for the moment. Being asked by what authority he is baptising (verse 25), John answered them, “I baptise with water, but among you stands one you do not know, even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie” (verses 26-27). By saying that he baptises with water (see also Matthew 3:11, Mark 1:7-8, and Luke 3:15-16), John confirms that he is sent by God. But then he also admits that he is unworthy to untie the sandal of the one to whom he bears witness, he is nothing compared to Jesus. So John the Baptist does not treat Jesus merely as Saviour, but as Lord.

Now John the Baptist has revealed Jesus as the magnificent sacrificial lamb who can take away sin. That is great news for you and me when we think about the things we wish we had never done. But about when we look at the future? We face the future and we think, “I wish, I will never do them again. I don’t want to just keep repeating the same old sins.” Well, John has some good news for us too and it’s all about the Spirit that Jesus baptises with. John is bearing witness again, that Jesus is the Spirit-anointed Christ (verses 32-33). Jesus identity was made clear to John when the Holy Spirit descended upon Jesus like a dove. The other Gospels tell us that this Spirit-anointing happened when Jesus came to be baptised by John with all the other Israelites. The coming of the Spirit upon Jesus confirms that he is God’s chosen king. And the good thing about Jesus receiving the Spirit is that he then is equipped to give the Spirit. And John talks about this giving of the Spirit in the language of baptism. Jesus the one anointed with the Spirit will give his Spirit to his people in what is called the baptism of the Holy Spirit.

Now if you’ve been around Christian circles for a little while, then you’ve probably heard the baptism of the Holy Spirit is described in a lot of different ways and is associated with all kinds of different somewhat whacky experiences, and I think it is somewhat unhelpful, because they distract you from the primary experience that comes with the baptism of the Holy Spirit. What is then this primary experience? It’s not about you speaking in weird languages, or losing control of yourself, or laughing uncontrollably or any other weird behaviour at all. The primary experience associated with the baptism of the Holy Spirit is faith in Jesus. It’s putting your trust in Jesus and being saved. We cannot separate the baptism of the Holy Spirit from salvation. It is the Spirit who opens blind eyes, so that sinners like you and me can be set free by the truth. Without the work of God’s Spirit, none of us would have put our trust in Jesus and have our sins forgiven. So the primary experience is faith in Jesus for salvation.

And when Jesus has given us his Spirit, he continues to work in us by his Spirit to change us so that the future can be different to the past. Jesus is constantly working in his people by his Spirit to grow us in godliness, to mature us in faith, to help us repent of our sin, so that we may grow to maturity in him. If there is sin in our past that we wish we would never repeat again, then we need the help of God’s Spirit to change. That’s why Jesus gives his Spirit to each believer, at the point when he draws them into a relationship with himself.

Jesus became one of use 2000 years ago. John the Baptist introduced him clearly as the Christ who baptises with the Spirit and 2000 years later Jesus is still changing people by his Spirit. Listen to how the apostle Paul puts it:

> So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. For if you live according to the flesh you will die, but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God. (Romans 8:12-14)

Without the work of the Spirit, we will live out the ways of the flesh. But Jesus has given us his Spirit through whom he is at work in us, helping us to live out the way of the Spirit. It means we don’t have to keep making the same mistake we’ve always made. It means we don’t have to keep committing the same sins we’ve always regretted. With God’s help, by his Holy Spirit, we can live differently. If you want to be changed, ask Jesus to change you by his Spirit.

John the Baptist testifies in verse 34 that Jesus is the Son of God, the Spirit-anointed Christ who baptises with the Holy Spirit so that God’s people would have God’s Spirit at work within them, changing them for better future. So John the Baptist testifies that he himself is not the one, but Jesus is. And Jesus will always be. In saying that Jesus will always be the sacrifice lamb, I do not mean that Jesus continues being sacrificed, but rather that his once-and-for-all sacrifice continues to have effect for all time. His sacrifice is a powerful event that changes world’s history forever.

In the last book of the Bible, the book of Revelation, the same apostle John, who wrote the Gospel we are looking at, is given the revelation of what heaven will be like. As John is given the revelation, he’s brought in the very throne room of heaven. What catches his attention is the one standing in the middle of the throne room.

> And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the elders I saw a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain. (Revelation 5:6)

In John’s revelation of heaven, he sees a living lamb that looks like it has been slain. The Lamb of God is bearing the wounds of his sacrifice at the centre of heaven. This slain lamb is not ordinary, but a glorious figure.

> And they sang a new song, saying,<br />
“Worthy are you to take the scroll<br />
and to open its seals,<br />
for you were slain, and by your blood you ransomed people for God<br />
from every tribe and language and people and nation,<br />
and you have made them a kingdom and priests to our God,<br />
and they shall reign on the earth.” (Revelation 5:9-10)

The glorious sacrifice of the Lamb of God will ring out forever. Jesus will bear the glorious wounds of the cross for all eternity as glorious reminders to us of that sacrifice by which he ransomed and redeemed people for God from every tribe, language, people, and nation.

Don’t ever underestimate it. How good it is that Jesus became one of us to take away our sin and to unite us with God by his Spirit. Make sure we trust in Jesus and, whatever we do, don’t miss out on what Jesus is offering.
